---
title: The Known Unknown
date: 11.28.23
author: ProducerJoe Rosenberg
tags: [99pi, article]
---

How to honor unidentified remains has always been one of the great conundrums
of war. The Romans were fond of honoring them with an empty sarcophagus. After
the Civil War, the Union buried 2,111 soldiers in a [mass
grave](https://www.nps.gov/arho/learn/historyculture/cemetery.htm) in
Arlington that they purposely built in the middle of Robert E. Lee’s rose
garden. It wasn’t until World War I that it occurred to anyone to bury a
single unknown soldier in a public setting.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/cemeterypict.gif)

World War I ushered in an era of total war and mass conscription, in which the
combatants on both sides were mostly ordinary citizens, often rendered
anonymous amidst the violence of the Western Front.

“Everything about the war — not only the numbers, but the nature of it was
dehumanizing,” says Robert Poole, author of the book [_On Hallowed Ground: The
Story of Arlington National Cemetery_](https://www.amazon.com/Hallowed-Ground-
Arlington-National-
Cemetery/dp/0802715494/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=on+hallowed+ground&qid=1551722975&s=gateway&sr=8-1).

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/David-railton.jpg)David
Railton, WWI Chaplain

One British chaplain named [David
Railton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Railton) saw some of the worst of
the fighting on the front lines. Railton would spend his nights conducting
funeral services over the often unidentifiable remains of soldiers ripped
apart by shellfire, sometimes burying them on the spot or en masse in the
giant craters the shells had left behind.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/51eLBhEg3cL.jpg)[The
Flag: Revd David Railton MC and the Tomb of the Unknown
Warrior](https://www.amazon.com/Flag-Revd-David-Railton-Warrior-
ebook/dp/B076HXLNRM/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?keywords=flag+david+railton&qid=1551722960&s=gateway&sr=8-1-fkmrnull)
by Andrew Richards

He thought about how terrible it was that so many people were essentially
being forgotten — they deserved better than that. It was around this time that
David Railton came across a temporary grave, a few miles behind the front,
marked only by a cross bearing the name of a regiment and the words: “An
unknown British soldier.”

## A Soldier’s Anonymity

After the war, Railton advocated for a grave bearing the body of a single
soldier to bring the impossibly large tragedy down to a human scale. The
soldier’s anonymity would allow each person who came to the grave to project
whatever was most important to them onto the mystery. It didn’t matter if you
wanted to honor all those who served or merely those who died, those who
volunteered or those who were drafted, or even whether you were for the war or
against it. Everyone was free to mourn in their own way.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/The_Unknown_Warrior_at_Westminster_Abbey_November_1920_Q31514.jpg)

When Britain dedicated the [Tomb of the Unknown
Warrior](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Unknown_Warrior) in Westminster
Abbey in 1920, it garnered a lot of attention. The dedication alone attracted
so many mourners, the line for viewing lasted ten days. Britain’s unknown
warrior wasn’t the only one. France, Romania, Italy — everybody at the same
time jumped on this idea. Over fifty countries would end up building similar
memorials. In part, because the formula was so easy to follow — all that was
needed was the body of a single unknown soldier.

The American memorial is especially beautiful. It sits at the top of a hill
that overlooks the rest of Arlington Cemetery. It has been watched over day
and night since 1937 by a lone guard, forever marching back and forth in front
of the tomb.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/02/A_Tomb_Sentinel_at_the_Tomb_of_the_Unknown_Soldier_in_Arlington_National_Cemetery-600x400.jpg)Photo
by Spc. Cody Torkelson (CC BY 2.0)

## X-26

The remains in the tomb are not even technically referred to as an “unknown
soldier.” No one knows which service they’re from, so instead of “soldier” or
“sailor” or “marine,” they’re simply referred to as the “Unknown.” In fact,
anything that narrows the scope of who this person could be — including where
exactly they were found is purposely withheld from the public in order to make
sure that they represent every possible service member. It’s one of the
reasons the tomb has become one of the Washington D.C. area’s biggest tourist
attractions.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/unknown-soldier-
tomb-376482_1280-600x398.jpg)

But in 1956, one small, [seemingly innocent
change](https://www.arlingtoncemetery.mil/Explore/Tomb-of-the-Unknown-Soldier)
to the formula of the Unknown would prove problematic: we began to add another
set of unidentified remains for every subsequent war. World War II, Korea, and
Vietnam — each would get their own Unknown.

At first, there were a lot of Unknowns to work with. In World War I there were
around 1,648 Unknowns, in World War II there were 8,526, the Korean war there
were 848. But thanks to improved battlefield evacuation tactics, the Vietnam
War produced only four sets of unidentified remains that could potentially go
into the tomb. Then, as more information about those remains was discovered,
only one set of remains remained unknown. That single set of remains was known
only as X-26, but his actual name was [Michael
Blassie](https://www.military.com/history/air-force-1st-lt-michael-
blassie.html).

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/MichaelBlassie-600x870.jpg)Michael
Blassie

## The Final Mission

Michael Blassie received an appointment to the Air Force and fell in love with
flying immediately. At flight school, Michael was assigned to fly a ground
attack aircraft known as the
[A-37](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cessna_A-37_Dragonfly). Dubbed the
“super-tweet” it was designed to fly low over its target. Pilots loved it
because being that close the ground heightened the sense of flight and speed.

By 1972, when Michael was deployed, America’s military presence in Southeast
Asia was shrinking rapidly. There were fewer than 25,000 US servicemen left in
Vietnam, as opposed to the over 500,000 who had been deployed by the late
1960s. American serviceman who remained behind were stretched thin. They had
to do more with less and that meant Michael was going to see a lot of combat.

Michael’s missions took him all over Vietnam, but the most dangerous was
arguably over a place called [An
Loc](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_An_L%E1%BB%99c), a town about 50
miles north of Saigon. In 1972, it was still under the control of the South
Vietnamese military, along with a handful of American advisors, but it was
surrounded by an invading North Vietnamese Army.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/36681361350_9b4b2bb280_o-600x448.jpg)An
Loc, Vietnam 1972. UPI Photo by [Jeff
Taylor](https://www.flickr.com/photos/13476480@N07/36681361350) (CC BY 2.0)

“The city of An Loc was totally leveled– it looked like Hiroshima,” says Chris
Calhoon who was stationed there as an Army Ranger. At one point he described
the wounded, with their meager medical support, as looking like something out
of the Civil War. They were completely cut off from the rest of the world. One
of Calhoon’s duties, in the midst of all this chaos, was to call in
airstrikes. Michael Blassie’s squadron was providing that air support over An
Loc.

It was on one of these bombing runs, shortly before Calhoon arrived in An Loc,
that Michael Blassie flew his 132th and final mission. Michael’s plane had
crashed deep in North Vietnamese held territory. A helicopter team tried to
get to the crash site, but due to heavy enemy fire, they had to leave after
just a few minutes empty-handed. Blassie was declared missing in action and
presumed dead. His body wouldn’t be coming home.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/161024-F-BD983-112-600x399.jpg)

## The Conspiracy Theorist

In 1994, over two decades after Michael had been killed, his family received a
phone call from a complete stranger named [Ted
Sampley](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2009/05/14/AR2009051404049.html). Sampley was a former
Green Beret who had served in Vietnam. He was convinced the government wasn’t
telling veterans everything it knew, and he was calling Patricia Blassie with
an outlandish theory about Michael’s death. He told her that he had been
researching who was shot down on the date of Michael’s death and he believed
that her brother’s remains were in the Tomb of the Unknowns.

“I thought this is the best example of internet conspiracy garbage I’ve seen
to date,” says Vince Gonzales, a reporter for CBS Denver who came across the
story three years later in 1997. Still, as hesitant as he was, Gonzales
thought maybe there could be more to the story.

Sampley had no direct evidence proving Michael was in the tomb, but that
didn’t make him wrong.

Whatever was known about the remains of the Vietnam Unknown had never been
revealed. It was all part of the effort to make sure that the Unknown could
represent everyone who ever fought in the war. Sampley had come across some
second-hand accounts suggesting that America’s only set of unknown remains
from Vietnam had been recovered from an aircraft that had been shot down in
1972. And he had only been able to find one missing plane that fully matched
the plane’s description: Michael Blassie’s.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/1920px-
Tomb_vietnam_deathwatch-600x352.jpg)Watch at the Tomb of the Unknowns over the
body of the Vietnam War Unknown Soldier.

Gonzales began filing FOIA requests and eventually got back a thick envelope
with military documents showing the entire process of the Unknown Soldier
selection process. They detailed that Michael Blassie’s remains had been
recovered in Vietnam and that the person who recovered them was Chris Calhoon.

## The Truth

In October of 1972, over five months after Blassie’s plane had disappeared
into the jungle, Calhoon assembled a South Vietnamese patrol to enter North
Vietnamese territory to find the wreckage. When they came back, they handed
Michael Blassie’s remains to Calhoon.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/vi_a_300b-600x741.jpg)Air
Force equipment found with Michael Blassie

The remains did not consist of much, just six bones. But they had also brought
back other evidence: an uninflated raft, a parachute, part of Michael’s flight
suit, and critically: his wallet with pictures of him and his family. There
was no question, the remains were Michael’s. Calhoon assumed that Michael’s
remains would be returning to his family, but that wasn’t the case.

The remains would eventually arrive at the Army’s Central Identification
Laboratory in Hawaii, but not before the wallet which was critical in linking
the remains to Blassie went missing. Even though he knew about the missing
wallet, the head of the lab, using now outdated techniques, determined that
the remains did not match Michael Blassie’s physical description. Instead,
they were simply designated as BTB — believed to be — Michael Blassie. Without
a positive match, due to Army policy, the Blassie family could not even be
told that any remains had been found.

Pressure began to mount in Washington to place a service member from Vietnam
in the tomb of the unknowns, but by 1980 the Blassie remains were the only
ones left that hadn’t been conclusively identified. Even though they were
still officially believed to belong to Blassie, the lab was ordered to strip
the remains of their “believed to be” designation, and give them the anonymous
designation X-26. The DNA technology that could conclusively identify the
remains was just around the corner, but in 1984 they were ordered to prepare
X-26 for burial.

## Bringing Michael Home

The file that Vince discovered made it clear the the person who had been put
in the tomb in 1984 had been far from unknown. Armed with the documents, he
teamed up with veteran CBS correspondent, Eric Engberg. They talked to anyone
they could find who was involved in the unknown selection process, and when
they felt they were ready, they handed over their findings to Patricia
Blassie.

On May 14, 1998, the Department of the Defense disinterred the remains of the
Vietnam veteran from the Tomb of the Unknowns. DNA samples were taken from
Michael’s mother Jean and his sister Judy and tested against the remains. They
were a match and Michael Blassie’s remains were returned to his family.

## Michael Joseph Blassie

Today, there is no body representing Vietnam at the tomb of the unknowns.
Thanks to improved forensics, there will likely never be an unknown from Iraq
or Afghanistan or any future war. The military is now in the [process of using
the DNA](https://www.stripes.com/news/dna-technology-advances-may-rule-out-
future-unknown-burials-1.40883) from the families of missing veterans to
identify over 650 sets of unknown remains from the Korean War. It’s
conceivable that they could soon use the same techniques on the unknown
serviceman inside the tomb. The unknowns from World War I and World War II are
another story for now, but anything is possible.

[![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/Unknown_Soldier_at_the_Washington_Navy_Yard-400x400.jpg)](https://99percentinvisible.org/episode/the-
known-unknown/unknown_soldier_at_the_washington_navy_yard/)

Unknown Soldier from World War I being taken from the USS Olympia at the
Washington Navy Yard and transported to the US Capitol to lay in state. On
November 11, 1921 the body was intered at Arlington National Cemetery
(photographed by E.B. Thompson)
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dcplcommons/3423377913/
http://www.flickr.com/people/dcplcommons/ District of Columbia Public Library

[![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/Unknown_Serviceman_ceremony_aboard_USS_Canberra_CAG-2_on_26_May_1958_NH_54118-400x400.jpg)](https://99percentinvisible.org/episode/the-
known-
unknown/unknown_serviceman_ceremony_aboard_uss_canberra_cag-2_on_26_may_1958_nh_54118/)

Arrival of Unknowns from Korean War

Patricia still visits the tomb. She says she’s not sure why she does it, but
it means that she’s gotten to know some of the guards. One of them told her
once that their mission — guarding the Unknowns — is never really over. In
Michael’s case, just this once, their mission was completed. They were just
looking out for him until he could go home.

![](https://99percentinvisible.org/app/uploads/2019/03/Tombstone_of_1Lt_Michael_Joseph_Blassie-600x450.jpg)


[Link to transcript](https://99percentinvisible.org/episode/the-known-unknown/transcript)